Build Biopython in 23 easy steps!!


==Setup required for a new release manager==

The instructions below require that you have access to a few servers and the code repository. When you start, be sure to have access to:

1. Write access to the github biopython repo.

2. biopython.org aka cloudportal.open-bio.org. You need to have write access to write the API and the source tarballs and Windows installers (might require 2 different operations) under the DIST folder.

3. Wordpress news.open-bio.org with posting permissions.

4. pypi - associated with Biopython.

5. Writing permissions on the wiki page.

If you don't have any of the above, please ask.

==The instructions proper==

These instructions are for a Unix machine, with a Windows machine also needed to test and prepare the Windows installers.

1. make sure I have the latest code
    drevil:~biopython> git pull origin master

2. bump version numbers and set the release data:
* Biopython version - edit  Bio/__init__.py
* Biopython Tutorial - update the date/version line in the Doc/Tutorial.tex file
* Biopython README - fill in the release date
* Make sure to commit the modified files to github.

3. make sure the README file is still up to date

4. add any important info to NEWS or DEPRECATED - you can get a log of recent git changes like this (adjust the date accordingly):
    git log --since="2009/08/30" --reverse --pretty="medium"
    
5. make sure CONTRIB still current

6. make sure setup.py is still up to date
* Are there any new modules which should get installed?
* You don't need to update version in setup.py itself (this is now done in Bio/__init__.py as described above)

7. do last check to make sure things are checked in
    > rm -r build
    > rm Tests/*.pyc
    > make clean -C Doc
    > git status

8. build Biopython and do last regression test
    drevil:~biopython> python setup.py build 
    drevil:~biopython> python setup.py test

Ideally do this with a clean checkout on your Windows machine too.  Assuming you have setup your compilers etc appropriately just do this:

    C:\python26\python setup.py build
    C:\python26\python setup.py test

    C:\python27\python setup.py build
    C:\python27\python setup.py test

    C:\python33\python setup.py build
    C:\python33\python setup.py test

    C:\python34\python setup.py build
    C:\python34\python setup.py test


If you are using MinGW, do not forget to add  --compiler=mingw32 (or make it the default on distutils, see the step on building on windows machines). Also If you are using a modern MinGW compiler, then distutils of Python will use an option (-mno-cywgin) that is deprecated and will break gcc. A possible solution is to [http://bugs.python.org/issue12641 edit distutils], but on recent Python (3.3 as tested) this seems to have been addressed.

Running the tests simultaneously is risky, as two threads may both try and read/write to the same temp files.

9. check out clean version somewhere else
    drevil:~tmp1/> git clone git://github.com/biopython/biopython.git
    drevil:~tmp1/> cd biopython

10. make documentation PDF, text and HTML files in Doc
    drevil:~biopython> cd Doc
    drevil:~biopython/Doc> make
    drevil:~biopython/Doc> make clean
    drevil:~biopython/Doc> cd ..

11. make MANIFEST. First, make sure MANIFEST.in up to date.
    > python setup.py sdist --manifest-only 

12. make the source distribution
    drevil:~tmp1/biopython> python setup.py sdist --formats=gztar,zip 

13. untar the file somewhere else
    drevil:~tmp2> tar -xzvf ../tmp1/biopython/dist/biopython-1.53.tar.gz
* Check to make sure it includes the HTML and PDF files under Doc

14. make sure I can build and test it
    drevil:~tmp2/biopython-1.53/> python setup.py build
    drevil:~tmp2/biopython-1.53/> python setup.py test
    drevil:~tmp2/biopython-1.53/> python setup.py install --root . 

A typical source of failure here (on the tests) is the lack of example files being added to the source distribution: add them to MANIFEST.in

15. Update API documentation using Epydoc (this can often report otherwise overlooked errors).
* Go to the ./usr/local/lib/python2.6/site-packages directory. This is the directory created under your source installation after the install step above (the name might vary a bit - it should be the place where the source packages were "installed"). Running epydoc in your git tree works, but can miss some packages due to import errors.
    epydoc -v -o ~/api -u http://biopython.org -n Biopython --docformat plaintext Bio BioSQL
    zip api.zip -r ~/api/
    scp api.zip biopython.org:.
* Move the generated ~/api directory to replace /home/websites/biopython.org/html/static/DIST/docs/api/ on biopython.org (aka cloudportal.open-bio.org).
* Also update /home/websites/biopython.org/html/static/DIST/docs/tutorial with the tutorial files
16. add git tag
    drevil:~biopython> git tag biopython-159
    drevil:~biopython> git push origin master --tags

17. On your windows machine, build the Windows installers (either from a clean checkout, or an unzipped copy of the source code bundle made earlier).  Build the installers first, if you do a build/test/install before hand you seem to get a bloated setup exe.  Assuming you have setup your compilers etc appropriately just do this:

    C:\python26\python setup.py bdist_wininst
    C:\python27\python setup.py bdist_wininst
    C:\python33\python setup.py bdist_wininst
    C:\python34\python setup.py bdist_wininst


If you are using MinGW, you will have to make distutils use it (it will use a MS compiler by default). Here (contrary to the build step) you cannot pass the compiler as a parameter. The best solution might be to [http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3297254/how-to-use-mingws-gcc-compiler-when-installing-python-package-using-pip configure distutils]

18. Remove any prior Biopython installations on your windows machine, and confirm the Windows installers work.

19. scp or ftp the .tar.gz, .zip and Windows installer files to the Biopython website, folder /home/websites/biopython.org/html/static/DIST/ on biopython.org (aka cloudportal.open-bio.org).

20. Upload to the python package index (except for beta/alpha level releases):

    > python setup.py register sdist upload

You need to have a login on pypi and be registered with Biopython to be able to upload the new version.

21. Update the website and announce the release:
* before you announce the release, be sure to send your announcement text to the biopython-dev mailing list for proof-reading/final corrections.
* add to [[Main_Page|main page]] and [[Download|downloads page]] (through the wiki), make sure the links work
* post the announcement on [http://news.open-bio.org news.open-bio.org] (which will update the [[News|news page]] and [http://twitter.com/Biopython twitter] via the news feed)
* add the new version to [https://redmine.open-bio.org/projects/biopython RedMine]
* send email to biopython@biopython.org and biopython-announce@biopython.org (see [[Mailing_lists|mailing lists]])
* forward the email to Linux packagers e.g. debian-med@lists.debian.org 

22. Ask Peter, Brad, or Bjoern to prepare a new Galaxy package on https://github.com/biopython/galaxy_packages and upload it to the main and test Galaxy ToolShed

23. Bump version numbers again
* Update Bio/__init__.py version
* Biopython Tutorial - update the date/version line in the Doc/Tutorial.tex file
* Make sure to commit the modified files to github.

Add a plus to the version to note that development is after the said version. E.g. if you have __version__ = "1.61", make it 1.61+