=== A Guide to Contributing to Biopython ===

So you want to contribute to Biopython, huh? Great! New contributions are the lifeblood of the project. However, if done incorrectly, they can quickly suck up valuable developer time. (We have day jobs too!) This is a short guide to the recommended way to contribute code to Biopython.

See also the chapter about contributing in the [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/tutorial/Tutorial.html Tutorial] ([http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/tutorial/Tutorial.pdf PDF]).

=== Non-code contributions ===

Even if you don't feel ready or able to contribute code, you can still help out.  There always things that can be improved on the [[documentation]] (even just proof reading, or telling us if a section isn't clear enough).  We also need people on the [[mailing lists]] to help out with beginner's questions, or to participate in debates about new features.  Maybe you can propose general examples for the [[Category%3ACookbook|wiki cookbook]]?

=== Finding a Project ===

The best contributions are the code that you have already been using in your daily research. This should be code that you think might be useful for other people and is already free of bugs. If you are thinking of sending this in, go on to Step 2, Submitting Code!

Otherwise, there are still many ways to contribute to Biopython, both involving coding and not. Some things that you can help on include:

* '''More unit tests:''' Some of our modules still only have partial unit test coverage.
* '''Support for More Programs:''' There are many different bioinformatics programs being developed. Identify one that does not currently have support in Biopython and add support for it. 
* '''Support for More File Formats:''' We can read and write lots of different file formats, but there are always more. For sequences and alignments look at the [[SeqIO]] and [[AlignIO]] pages first.  Note that HTML parsers for specific websites are discouraged as these require long term maintenance.
* '''Support for Databases:''' Identify a biological database that does not currently have support in Biopython and add support for it.
* '''Add New Data Type:''' You can add code that works with a new type of data. This is a tough area, though. Creating a new robust and useful data type is difficult, and we may be hesitant to add something unless it's already tried and tested.
* '''Add New Algorithm:''' You can add a new well-known algorithm that might be useful for other biologists.
* '''Parser Verification:''' As Biopython supports more and more databases, the difficulty in maintaining the format parsers increases. These formats are changing very quickly. Thus, we need to periodically verify that the parsers are still working. For example, the GenBank parser needs to be checked to make sure it handles each new dump of GenBank.
* '''Regression Tests:''' Biopython uses a regression testing framework to make sure code is working. Although most of the functionality in Biopython is tested, there are still some holes.
* '''Documentation:''' The tutorial is not complete and can use some work. New users can be especially helpful here, as you learn new packages. Our API documentation could also do with some work, see coding conventions below.
* '''News Postings:''' If you keep up with the mailing lists (which are fairly low volume), we need someone to help summarize important posts and events as [[News|news items]].

=== Submitting Code ===

In general, we will consider any code that is applicable to biological or chemical data. Please do not submit code whose functionality largely overlaps with code already in Biopython, unless there is an obvious improvement and you have a plan for integrating the code.

Before you submit it, please check that:

* It is generalized and likely to be useful for other things.
* The dependencies are reasonable.  Adding support for a third party command line tool is fine, but requiring additional python libraries needs discussion. Dependencies on commercial closed-source software probably won't be accepted to Biopython.
* The code will be licensed with the Biopython license.
* You must have the legal right to contribute it and license it under the Biopython license.
* You are enthusiastic about maintaining it and responding to bug reports.
* You included docstrings in the code, and are willing to write documentation.
* You have written, or are willing to write, a unit test for the new code.

If all these terms seem acceptable, please send a description of your code to biopython-dev@biopython.org (see [[Mailing lists]]). Be sure to subscribe to biopython-dev before sending a message, otherwise your message will be discarded by the mail server (this was done to avoid spam on the mailing list). Don't send the code directly to the biopython-dev mailing list. Instead, please use [http://redmine.open-bio.org/projects/biopython our bug tracker] by first filing an enhancement bug, and then attaching the file(s).

=== Coding conventions ===

Biopython tries to follow the coding conventions laid out by Guido in his [http://www.python.org/doc/essays/styleguide.html Python Style Guide] (now covered by [http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/ PEP 8 Style Guide for Python Code] and [http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0257/ PEP 257 Docstring Conventions]). The important highlights are:

* Classes should be in AllFirstLetterUppercase style.
* Functions should be in lowercase_separated_by_underscores style.
* Variables are either in lowercase_separated_by_underscores or lowercasemungedtogether style, depending on your preferences and the length of the variable.
* _single_leading_underscores to indicate internal functions or classes that shouldn't be called directly be a user.
* Tabs are bad. Most people in the Python community now dislike tabs and instead prefer using 4 spaces for indentation. Most editors can help you take care of this (Emacs python-mode uses the 4 space rule, for instance). Tools/scripts/reindent.py in the Python distribution will help get rid of tabs in files. 

The one notable exception is module names, where we tend to use title case. With hindsight this is unfortunate, but we are constrained by backwards compatibility.

[http://epydoc.sourceforge.net/ Epydoc] is being used to generate automatic documentation of the source code so it definitely is useful to put helpful comments in your code so that they will be reflected in [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/api the API documentation] (in addition to all the normal reasons to document code).

We generally don't do anything fancy to try and format the comments in the code -- by default they are displayed by epydoc exactly as written in the source. This isn't fancy, but it's effective and easier then trying to deal with the myriad of different ways to try and structure source code comments.

However, there are a few tricks to make your documentation look it's best. The main ones are:

* Modules, classes and function documentation should start with a one line description. Epydoc is a little picky, so you need to make sure that the description ends with a period. Not too hard. 

Here's an example of a module documented so that epydoc will be happy:

<source lang=python>
"""This is a one line description of the module followed with a period.

More information about the module and its goals and usage.
"""

class MyClass:
    """One line description of the class followed by a period.

    More information about the class -- its purpose, usage, and
    implementation.
    """

    def my_function(self, spam):
        """A terse description of my function followed with a period.

        A longer description with all kinds of additional goodies. This may
        include information about what the function does, along with
        what parameters it will be passed and what it returns. You know, 
        information so people know how to use the function.
        """
        #the code ...
</source>