==== Documentation ====
New to BioPython? Check out the [[Getting_Started|Getting Started]] page, or follow one of the links below.

* Installation instructions cover the installation of Python itself, the Biopython dependencies, and Biopython itself. 
:[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/install/Installation.html HTML] | [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/install/Installation.pdf PDF]
* The '''Biopython Tutorial and Cookbook''' contains the bulk of Biopython documentation. It provides information to get you started with Biopython, in addition to specific documentation on a number of modules. 
:[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/tutorial/Tutorial.html HTML] | [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/tutorial/Tutorial.pdf PDF]
* API documentation for Biopython modules is generated directly from source code comments using [http://epydoc.sourceforge.net/ Epydoc].
:[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/api HTML]
* Wiki documentation,
:* [[Seq]] and [[SeqRecord]] objects
:* [[SeqIO|Bio.SeqIO]] - sequence input/output
:* [[AlignIO|Bio.AlignIO]] - alignment input/output
:* [[PopGen|Bio.PopGen]] - population genetics
:* [[The Biopython Structural Bioinformatics FAQ|Bio.PDB]] - structural bioinformatics
:* Biopython's [[BioSQL|BioSQL interface]]
* Documentation for the Biopython interfaces to BioSQL cover installing Python database adaptors and basic usage of BioSQL. 
:[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/biosql/python_biosql_basic.html HTML] | [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/biosql/python_biosql_basic.pdf PDF]
* Documentation for the cluster module in Biopython. This describes the underlying C library and the Python interface. 
:[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/cluster/cluster.pdf PDF]
* Cookbook-style documentation:
:*[[Category%3ACookbook|Cookbook documentation]] (on the wiki)
:*The Biopython Structural Bioinformatics FAQ (i.e. how to use the Bio.PDB module). 
::[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/cookbook/biopdb_faq.pdf PDF]
:*Working with restriction enzymes. 
::[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/cookbook/Restriction.html HTML]

==== Documentation for Developers ====

* List of [[Active projects]] to get involved with.
* How to [[Contributing|contribute code]] to Biopython.
* [[Deprecation policy]]
* Instructions for [[building a release]] of Biopython.
* Details about the biopython.org [[website]].

==== Online Course Notes ====

* Andrew Dalke taught an introduction to programming for Bioinformatics in Python class at the National Bioinformatics Network in South Africa.
:http://www.dalkescientific.com/writings/NBN/
* Ravinder Singh and Scott Kelley teach a Bioinformatics course using Biopython at the University of Colorado.
:http://mcdb.colorado.edu/courses/6440/index.html
* Katja Schuerer, Catherine Letondal and Eric Deveaud have an online course that covers getting started in programming with Python. It's aimed at biologists that want to learn programming.
:http://www.pasteur.fr/formation/infobio/python/

==== Papers ====

We have a separate list of [[Publications|publications citing or using Biopython]].  If you use Biopython in a scientific publication, please cite the application note <cite>CockEtAl2009</cite> and/or one of the other listed papers:

<biblio>
#CockEtAl2009 pmid=19304878
// This application note covers the whole of Biopython
#ChapmanAndChang2000 Chapman BA and Chang JT. ''Biopython: Python tools for computational biology.'' ACM SIGBIO Newsletter 2000 Aug; 20, 15-19. [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/acm/ACMbiopy.html HTML] | [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/acm/ACMbiopy.pdf PDF]
// This served as the official project announcement.
#HamelryckAndManderick2003 pmid=14630660
// The Bio.PDB module is described here.
#DeHoonEtAl2004 pmid=14871861
// The Bio.Cluster module is described here.
#PritchardEtAl2006 pmid=16377612
// This describes GenomeDiagram, which has now been integrated into Biopython.
#CockEtAl2009b pmid=20015970
// This describes the FASTQ file format as supported in Biopython, BioPerl, BioRuby, BioJava and EMBOSS
#TalevichEtAl2012 pmid=22909249
// This describes the Bio.Phylo and Bio.Phylo.PAML modules.
</biblio>

==== Presentations ====


* BOSC 2013 presentation "Biopython Project Update"
:[http://www.open-bio.org/bosc2013/day1/BOSC2013_Biopython_Update_-_Peter_Cock.pdf PDF] | [http://www.slideshare.net/pjacock/biopython-update-bosc2013/ Flash version]
* BOSC 2012 presentation "Biopython Project Update"
:[http://www.slideshare.net/jandot/e-talevich-biopython-projectupdate Flash version]
* BOSC 2011 presentation "Biopython Project Update"
:[http://www.slideshare.net/bosc2011/talk6-biopython-bosc2011 Flash version]
* BOSC 2010 presentation "Biopython Project Update"
:[http://www.slideshare.net/chapmanb/biopython-at-bosc-2010 Flash version]
* July 2010 - EuroSciPy2010, Paris
:[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/presentations/Biopython_EuroSciPy2010.pdf PDF]
* February 2010 Biopython workshop at the University of Georgia
:[http://etal.myweb.uga.edu/biopywork.pdf PDF] | [http://www.slideshare.net/etalevich/biopython-programming-workshop-at-uga Flash version]
* BOSC 2009 presentation "Biopython Project Update"
:[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/presentations/Biopython_BOSC_2009.pdf PDF] | [http://www.slideshare.net/bosc/cock-biopython-bosc2009 Flash version]
* Scottish Bioinformatics Forum NextGenBug meeting June 2009 - Second generation sequence data and Biopython
:[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/presentations/Biopython_NextGenBUG_June2009.pdf PDF]
* Laptop session at "2009 Biología Computacional de Proteínas workshop" at Quilmes National University
:[http://www.bioinformatica.info/biopython/ HTML] (requires Crunchy to try the code online)
* BOSC 2008 presentation "Biopython Project Update"
:[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/presentations/Biopython_BOSC_2008.pdf PDF] | [http://www.slideshare.net/bosc_2008/antao-biopython-bosc2008/ Flash version]
* BOSC 2007 presentation "Biopython Project Update"
:[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/presentations/Biopython_BOSC_2007.pdf PDF] | [http://www.slideshare.net/bosc/biopython Flash version]
* March 2004 presentation at Exelixis about Biopython. Includes code examples with Biopython libraries and Martel.
:[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/presentations/biopython_exelixis.pdf PDF] | [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/presentations/biopython_exelixis.tar.gz tarball with LaTeX source]
* BOSC 2003 presentation about Biopython and using it for Laboratory Analysis Pipelines.
:[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/presentations/bosc_biopython.pdf PDF] | [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/presentations/bosc_biopython.tar.gz tarball with LaTeX source]
* General talk about scripting with Biopython based example of a primer design program (old).
:[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/presentations/scripting.pdf PDF] | [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/presentations/scripting.tar.gz tarball with LaTeX source]
* Talk about Python and Biopython with an emphasis on teaching the design goals of Biopython (old).
:[http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/presentations/biopython.pdf PDF] | [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/presentations/biopy_group.tar.gz tarball with LaTeX source]

==== Logo ====

Read more about the [[Logo|Biopython logo]].