= Current Release -- 1.49 -- 21 November 2008 =

See also [http://biopython.open-bio.org/SRC/biopython/NEWS What's new].

=== Files ===

* Source Tarball -- [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.49.tar.gz biopython-1.49.tar.gz] 4,052 Kb
* Source Zip File -- [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.49.zip biopython-1.49.zip] 4,498 Kb
* Windows Installer for Python 2.3 and NumPy 1.1 -- [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.49.win32-py2.3.exe biopython-1.49.win32-py2.3.exe] 1,111 Kb
* Windows Installer for Python 2.4 and NumPy 1.1 -- [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.49.win32-py2.4.exe biopython-1.49.win32-py2.4.exe] 1,115 Kb
* Windows Installer for Python 2.5 and NumPy 1.1 -- [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.49.win32-py2.5.exe biopython-1.49.win32-py2.5.exe] 1,115 Kb
* Windows Installer for Python 2.6 -- not available as NumPy isn't yet available on Python 2.6 on Windows.

'''NOTE''' : There are been some significant changes since Biopython 1.48 such as the move from Numeric to NumPy, so this is a slightly more risky update than usual. It would be unwise to install this on a production machine without doing extensive testing.  Please report any issues on the mailing list or [http://bugzilla.open-bio.org/ bugzilla].

=== Installation Instructions ===

For Windows we provide click-and-run installers (specific to your version of python), but you will first need to install some prerequisite software (listed below).  Unfortunately, NumPy is not yet available for Python 2.6 on Windows, so we don't yet provide a Biopython installer for Python 2.6.

Most Linux distributions will include an optional Biopython package (described below), and will take care of any prerequisite software automatically.    

Otherwise you typically install from source by downloading and uncompressing the archive, then running the commands:

 python setup.py build
 python setup.py test
 sudo python setup.py install

If you have trouble, see the full installation instructions:

* [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/install/Installation.html HTML Full Installation Instructions]
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/install/Installation.pdf PDF Full Installation Instructions]

If you are still stuck, sign up to the [[Mailing_lists|Biopython mailing list]] and ask for help there.

=== Required Software ===

* [http://www.python.org Python 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 or 2.6]
* [http://www.python.org/doc/current/inst/inst.html A C compiler (if compiling from source)] You need a C compiler supported by distutils, gcc will work fine on UNIX-like platforms.  This is not needed on Windows if using the install programs provided above.
* [http://numpy.scipy.org/ NumPy (Numerical Python)]. Note that until BioPython 1.49, Biopython used the older Numeric library.  We have tested NumPy 1.0, 1.1 and 1.2 with Biopython.  Note NumPy 1.2 requires at least Python 2.4.

=== Optional Software ===

For compiling Biopython:
* [http://flex.sourceforge.net/ flex: The Fast Lexical Analyzer] -- for building Bio.PDB.mmCIF.MMCIFlex which is used to parse macromolecular Crystallographic Information Files (mmCIF)

Some parts of Biopython use the following additional python libraries:
* [http://www.reportlab.org/downloads.html ReportLab] -- used for pdf graphics code
* [http://sourceforge.net/projects/mysql-python MySQLdb] -- used for [[BioSQL]] with a MySQL database

In addition Biopython includes wrapper code for calling a number of third party command line tools including:
* [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Wise2/ Wise2] -- for command line tool dnal
* [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/download.shtml NCBI Standalone BLAST] -- command line tool for running BLAST on your local machine
* [ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/software/unix/clustalw/ Clustalw] -- command line tool for building sequence alignments
* [http://cmpg.unibe.ch/software/simcoal2/ SIMCOAL2] and [http://www.rubic.rdg.ac.uk/~mab/software.html FDist] -- command line tools for population genetics
* [http://emboss.sourceforge.net/ EMBOSS] -- lots of useful command line tools.

= Easy Install = 

We don't officially sanction this option, but it has been reported to work fine.
If you have [http://peak.telecommunity.com/DevCenter/EasyInstall easy_install] installed on your computer, you can download and install the latest Biopython distribution by simply executing this command:

 easy_install -f http://biopython.org/DIST/ biopython

You will have to have administrator's rights to do this. Eventually, on a Gnu/Linux system, you could use one of the followings:

 sudo easy_install -f http://biopython.org/DIST/ biopython
or
 su -; easy_install -f http://biopython.org/DIST/ biopython

= Packages =

For those of you using Linux, the easiest way to install Biopython is through your distribution's package management system.  However, unless you are running a recent release of your Linux Distribution, you may find that the Biopython packages available to be a little out of date.  You might want to see if there is a backport available, otherwise you will have to install Biopython from source.

=== Ubuntu ===

You should be able to install Biopython and its dependencies using the Synaptic GUI tool (on the main menu under System / Administration / Synaptic Package Manager), or at the command line using:

 sudo apt-get install python-biopython

However, this will probably not be the latest release (see [http://packages.ubuntu.com/python-biopython listing here]).  If you want the latest version of Biopython, you will need to install it from source.  However, you should be able to automatically install the build dependencies with the following command:

 sudo apt-get build-dep python-biopython

Note: You may need to additionally install the NumPy package by hand, as an out of date repository will still expect Biopython to use Numeric instead.

=== Fedora ===

Biopython is an official Fedora package (since Fedora 5).  The package is named [http://admin.fedoraproject.org/pkgdb/packages/name/python-biopython python-biopython], and can be installed using yum:

 yum install python-biopython

or via one of the GUI package management systems such as pirut and PackageKit (available in F-9 and later).  Biopython 1.45 is the latest available (as of 2008-06-04).

=== Gentoo Linux ===

Gentoo's portage tree contains an ebuild (sci-biology/biopython) which builds from source.  To install it, open a terminal as root and run:

 emerge -va biopython 

[http://www.gentoo-portage.com/sci-biology/biopython Here] is a link to Biopython at [http://www.gentoo-portage.com Gentoo-Portage] which shows the latest versions in Gentoo's Portage tree.

= Ports =

===FreeBSD===

The most easy way of installing BioPython in [http://www.freebsd.org/ FreeBSD] is through the [http://www.freebsd.org/ports/ Ports Collection]. If you're new to this procedure please take a look at [http://www.freebsd.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook/ports-using.html this document]. Supposing that you're familiar with this method and that you have an up-to-date ports tree, all you need to do is to execute the following commands as root:

<bash>
# cd /usr/ports/biology/py-biopython
# make install clean
</bash>

Due to the great architecture of the ports system, this simple commands will automatically fetch and install BioPython (as well as its necessary dependencies).

= Old Releases =

Prior to the current release (Biopython 1.49), the most recent release was Biopython 1.49 beta.  This requires NumPy and not Numeric:

* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.49b.tar.gz biopython-1.49b.tar.gz] 4,331 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.49b.zip biopython-1.49b.zip] 4,780 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.49b.win32-py2.3.exe biopython-1.49b.win32-py2.3.exe] 1,109 Kb -- Windows Installer for Python 2.3 and NumPy 1.1
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.49b.win32-py2.4.exe biopython-1.49b.win32-py2.4.exe] 1,113 Kb -- Windows Installer for Python 2.4 and NumPy 1.1
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.49b.win32-py2.5.exe biopython-1.49b.win32-py2.5.exe] 1,114 Kb -- Windows Installer for Python 2.5 and NumPy 1.1

Please note that Biopython 1.48 and older require the Numeric library, not its replacement NumPy.  Windows installers for Python 2.4 and older are available from the [http://numpy.scipy.org/#older_array Numerical Python] website. A Windows installer for Numeric 24.2 for Python 2.5 is available here: [http://biopython.org/DIST/Numeric-24.2.win32-py2.5.exe Numeric-24.2.win32-py2.5.exe] 446 Kb

Please note that Biopython 1.48 and older used [http://www.egenix.com/www2002/python/eGenix-mx-Extensions-v2.x.html/ mxTextTools 2.0] in some of the parsers.  There were a few niggles with mxTextTools 3.0, so ideally install the older mxTextTools 2.0.

* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.48.tar.gz biopython-1.48.tar.gz] 4,051 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.48.zip biopython-1.48.zip] 4,542 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.48.win32-py2.3.exe biopython-1.48.win32-py2.3.exe] 1,226 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.48.win32-py2.4.exe biopython-1.48.win32-py2.4.exe] 1,254 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.48.win32-py2.5.exe biopython-1.48.win32-py2.5.exe] 1,254 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.47.tar.gz biopython-1.47.tar.gz] 4,018 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.47.zip biopython-1.47.zip] 4,528 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.47.win32-py2.3.exe biopython-1.47.win32-py2.3.exe] 1,207 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.47.win32-py2.4.exe biopython-1.47.win32-py2.4.exe] 1,236 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.47.win32-py2.5.exe biopython-1.47.win32-py2.5.exe] 1,236 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.46.tar.gz biopython-1.46.tar.gz] 3,926 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.46.zip biopython-1.46.zip] 4,426 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.46.win32-py2.3.exe biopython-1.46.win32-py2.3.exe] 1,206 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.46.win32-py2.4.exe biopython-1.46.win32-py2.4.exe] 1,235 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.46.win32-py2.5.exe biopython-1.46.win32-py2.5.exe] 1,235 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.45.tar.gz biopython-1.45.tar.gz] 3,886 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.45.zip biopython-1.45.zip] 4,395 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.45.win32-py2.3.exe biopython-1.45.win32-py2.3.exe] 1,113 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.45.win32-py2.4.exe biopython-1.45.win32-py2.4.exe] 1,141 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.45.win32-py2.5.exe biopython-1.45.win32-py2.5.exe] 1,142 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.44.tar.gz biopython-1.44.tar.gz] 3,750 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.44.zip biopython-1.44.zip] 4,243 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.44.win32-py2.3.exe biopython-1.44.win32-py2.3.exe] 1,091 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.44.win32-py2.4.exe biopython-1.44.win32-py2.4.exe] 1,116 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.44.win32-py2.5.exe biopython-1.44.win32-py2.5.exe] 1,116 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.43.tar.gz biopython-1.43.tar.gz] 3,778 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.43.zip biopython-1.43.zip] 4,271 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.43.win32-py2.3.exe biopython-1.43.win32-py2.3.exe] 1,104 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.43.win32-py2.4.exe biopython-1.43.win32-py2.4.exe] 1,108 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.43.win32-py2.5.exe biopython-1.43.win32-py2.5.exe] 1,109 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.42.tar.gz biopython-1.42.tar.gz] 3,841 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.42.zip biopython-1.42.zip] 4,399 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.42.win32-py2.3.exe biopython-1.42.win32-py2.3.exe] 1,070 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.42.win32-py2.4.exe biopython-1.42.win32-py2.4.exe] 1,074 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.42.win32-py2.5.exe biopython-1.42.win32-py2.5.exe] 1,075 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.41.tar.gz biopython-1.41.tar.gz] 3,719 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.41.zip biopython-1.41.zip] 4,241 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.41.win32-py2.3.exe biopython-1.41.win32-py2.3.exe] 1,038 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.41.win32-py2.4.exe biopython-1.41.win32-py2.4.exe] 1,042 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.40b.tar.gz biopython-1.40b.tar.gz] 3,437 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.40b.zip biopython-1.40b.zip] 3,267 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.40b.win32-py2.3.exe biopython-1.40b.win32-py2.3.exe] 1,019 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.40b.win32-py2.4.exe biopython-1.40b.win32-py2.4.exe] 1,023 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.30.tar.gz biopython-1.30.tar.gz] 3,186 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.24.tar.gz biopython-1.24.tar.gz] 3,081 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.24.zip biopython-1.24.zip] 3,623 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.24.win32-py2.2.exe biopython-1.24.win32-py2.2.exe] 892 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.24.win32-py2.3.exe biopython-1.24.win32-py2.3.exe] 894 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.23.tar.gz biopython-1.23.tar.gz] 2,241 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.23.zip biopython-1.23.zip] 2,719 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.23.win32-py2.2.exe biopython-1.23.win32-py2.2.exe] 833 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.23.win32-py2.3.exe biopython-1.23.win32-py2.3.exe] 842 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.22.tar.gz biopython-1.22.tar.gz] 2,214 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.22.zip biopython-1.22.zip] 2,691 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.21.tar.gz biopython-1.21.tar.gz] 2,214 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.21.zip biopython-1.21.zip] 2,897 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.21.win32-py2.2.exe biopython-1.21.win32-py2.2.exe] 770 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.21.win32-py2.3.exe biopython-1.21.win32-py2.3.exe] 832 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.20.tar.gz biopython-1.20.tar.gz] 2,101 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.20.zip biopython-1.20.zip] 2,602 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.10.tar.gz biopython-1.10.tar.gz] 1,811 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.10.zip biopython-1.10.zip] 2,300 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.10.win32-py2.2.exe biopython-1.10.win32-py2.2.exe] 1,199 Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.00a4.tar.gz biopython-1.00a4.tar.gz] 1,739Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.00a4.zip biopython-1.00a4.zip] 2,121Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.00a4.win32-py2.0.exe biopython-1.00a4.win32-py2.0.exe] 835Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.00a4.win32-py2.1.exe biopython-1.00a4.win32-py2.1.exe] 837Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.00a4.win32-py2.2.exe biopython-1.00a4.win32-py2.2.exe] 838Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/MacBiopython-1.00a4.sit MacBiopython-1.00a4.sit] 2.2Mb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.00a3.tar.gz biopython-1.00a3.tar.gz] 1,816Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.00a3.zip biopython-1.00a3.zip] 2,165Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.00a3.win32-py2.0.exe biopython-1.00a3.win32-py2.0.exe] 583Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/biopython-1.00a3.win32-py2.1.exe biopython-1.00a3.win32-py2.1.exe] 585Kb
* [http://biopython.org/DIST/Macbiopython-1.00a3.sit.bin Macbiopython-1.00a3.sit.bin] 1926Kb