==Download and Installation==

See our [[Download|downloads page]] for details including the prerequisites.  For Windows we provide click-and-run installers.  Most Linux distributions will include an optional Biopython package.
Otherwise you typically install from source by downloading and uncompressing the archive, then running the command:

 sudo python setup.py install

You can check your installation has worked at the python prompt:

<source lang=python>
>>> import Bio
</source>

If that gives no error, you should be done.  If you get something like "ImportError: No module named Bio" something has gone wrong.

==Tutorial==

The Biopython Tutorial and Cookbook ([http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/tutorial/Tutorial.html HTML], [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/tutorial/Tutorial.pdf PDF]) contains the bulk of our documentation.  See [[Documentation]] for more links.

==Quick example==

Executing this:
<source lang=python>
from Bio.Seq import Seq,translate

#create a sequence object of some DNA
my_seq = Seq('CATGTAGATAG')

#print out some details about it
print 'seq is %i bases long' % len(my_seq)
print 'reverse complement is %s' % my_seq.reverse_complement().tostring()

#or see the whole record
print 'sequence record:', my_seq

#translate the sequence into a protein
my_protein = translate(my_seq)

print 'protein translation is %s' % my_protein.tostring()
print 'protein record:', my_protein

</source>

Produces:
<pre>
seq is 11 bases long
reverse complement is CTATCTACATG
sequence record: Seq('CATGTAGATAG', Alphabet())
protein translation is HVD
protein record: Seq('HVD', HasStopCodon(IUPACProtein(), '*'))
</pre>

==Reading and writing Sequence Files==

If you are using Biopython 1.43 or later, try out the new [[SeqIO]] module.

==Beginners==

* Learn how to program in [http://www.python.org Python]
** [http://swaroopch.info/text/Byte_of_Python:Main_Page A Byte of Python]
** [http://www.diveintopython.org/toc/index.html Dive Into Python]
** [http://rgruet.free.fr/PQR25/PQR2.5.html Python Quick Reference]
* Browse the [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/tutorial/Tutorial.html Biopython Tutorial]
* Examine the [http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/api Class Diagram] if you'd like to know more about the relationships between the modules.

==Further reading==

* Use the Wiki Search tools to find more information on specific topics.