=== Discussion and questions ===

We actively discuss Biopython and Python usage in Bioinformatics on a few dedicated mailing lists. Please join us; to avoid spam, you can post a message only if you are subscribed to the mailing list.

A few other useful places for questions and answers:

* [http://biostar.stackexchange.com/ BioStar] -- A dedicated Bioinformatics question and answer forum. Please tag your post with: biopython.
* [http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/biopython StackOverflow] -- The main Stack Overflow programming question and answer forum. Please tag your posts with: biopython.

=== Searching ===
Gmane archives of the lists, linked below, provide a nice interface to search past messages. A number of questions have been discussed and answered; before posting please search for relevant discussions which might help. 

=== Discussion List ===
[mailto:biopython@biopython.org biopython@biopython.org]

Unmoderated list for use, comments, help, and other things related to Biopython.

[http://lists.open-bio.org/mailman/listinfo/biopython/ List Website] | [http://lists.open-bio.org/pipermail/biopython/ Web Archive] | [http://dir.gmane.org/gmane.comp.python.bio.general Gmane web archive]

=== Development List ===
[mailto:biopython-dev@biopython.org biopython-dev@biopython.org]

Unmoderated list for Biopython developers and interested people.

[http://lists.open-bio.org/mailman/listinfo/biopython-dev/ List Website] | [http://lists.open-bio.org/pipermail/biopython-dev/ Web Archive] | [http://dir.gmane.org/gmane.comp.python.bio.devel Gmane web archive]

===  Announcement List ===
[mailto:biopython-announce@biopython.org biopython-announce@biopython.org]

Low volume moderated list, providing announcements of major Biopython releases and upgrades.

[http://lists.open-bio.org/mailman/listinfo/biopython-announce/ List Website] | [http://lists.open-bio.org/pipermail/biopython-announce/ Web Archive] | [http://dir.gmane.org/gmane.comp.python.bio.announce Gmane web archive]