=== Introduction ===

The source code from Biopython is freely available for your use and contribution under our [http://www.biopython.org/DIST/LICENSE liberal license].

The [http://github.com/biopython/biopython Biopython source code] is kept under a distributed version control system which allows multiple users from around the world to work on the same code base at the same time.  We currently use [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Git_%28software%29 git] (developed by Linus Torvalds for Linux kernel development) hosted on [http://github.com GitHub].

Our core developers maintain a stable trunk from which we will roll releases as new functionality is integrated and bugs are fixed.

=== Viewing the source code ===

You can [http://github.com/biopython/biopython browse our latest source code on github].

=== Track changes ===

You can [[Tracking_commits|track changes]] via [[wp:RSS (file format)|RSS]].

=== Downloading the latest source ===

You can download the latest source code by clicking the Download link near the top of the [http://github.com/biopython/biopython Biopython GitHub page] (this will offer you a [http://github.com/biopython/biopython/tarball/master tar ball] or [http://github.com/biopython/biopython/zipball/master zip] file).

An hourly updated copy of the code is also available at http://biopython.open-bio.org/SRC/biopython (just a snapshot - no history etc).

=== Anonymous Access ===

Getting a copy of the repository (called "cloning" in git terminology) is very simple using the git command line tool, you don't need an account or password:

 git clone git://github.com/biopython/biopython.git

This command creates a local copy of the entire Biopython repository on your machine (your own personal copy of the official repository with its complete history).
You can update this local copy at the command line (from within the Biopython repository directory) with:

 git pull origin

You can even make ''local'' changes and commit them to this local copy, see [[GitUsage]] or the git documentation for further information.

=== Write Access ===

In order to make changes to the official repository, you will need a github account with collaborator status.
Write access is available for Biopython developers (including all those who previously had CVS commit rights).

This is normally given on a case by case basis, and the best place to discuss getting write access is on the [mailto:biopython-dev@biopython.org Biopython Development mailing list].  

Once you have access, see the instructions on [[GitUsage]]

=== Migration from CVS ===

Most of the other [http://open-bio.org Open Bioinformatics Foundation] projects migrated from [[CVS]] to [[SVN|Subversion (SVN)]].  Biopython had been considering [[Subversion_migration|moving from CVS to SVN]] for a while, but instead [[GitMigration|moved to git]] in September 2009. Note that [http://bioruby.org BioRuby] also uses github.